# Using meaningful version numbers
Software that is being developed often undergoes changes that alter its dependencies or output.
Keeping track of changes in your software and which version was used to produce results (for testing or for publishing) improves reproducibility.

## Semantic Versioning
[Semantic Versioning](https://semver.org/spec/v2.0.0.html) is a commonly used approach to naming release versions of software.
It consists of three numbers, separated by periods.
From the website for SemVer 2.0.0:
> Given a version number MAJOR.MINOR.PATCH, increment the:
>
> 1. MAJOR version when you make incompatible API changes,
> 2. MINOR version when you add functionality in a backwards-compatible manner, and
> 3. PATCH version when you make backwards-compatible bug fixes.
>
> Additional labels for pre-release and build metadata are available as extensions to the MAJOR.MINOR.PATCH format.

Rather than quoting the 11 [SemVer 2.0.0 specifications](https://semver.org/spec/v2.0.0.html#semantic-versioning-specification-semver), which you should read now, I will try to explain some reasons for using Semantic Versioning in Brendel Group software.
This will undoubtedly include some redundancy with the SemVer website, but will not serve as a replacement.
Seriously, go read it.
It's not very long.

## Documenting your API
Unlike version control with software like Git, Semantic Versioning is designed to communicate information specifically about software's Application Programming Interface (API).
In the context of the software workflows often produced by the Brendel Group, an [API](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Application_programming_interface) can be described as "the expected potential inputs and outputs of a program".
More specifically, this includes all the command-line options and their uses, and all of the files and/or stdout/stderr potentially produced by running the program.
The first specification of SemVer 2.0.0 is "Software using Semantic Versioning MUST declare a public API. This API could be declared in the code itself or exist strictly in documentation. However it is done, it should be precise and comprehensive."

Any software released by the Brendel Group should have a comprehensive manual that, among other things, serves to declare a public API, i.e., how the software can be used.
Although it can feel irritating to write and update a manual for software that is still in a state of rapid development, you will probably find that taking the time to document what you expect your software to do leads to clearer thinking and better coding.

## Reproducible results
The fourth specification of SemVer 2.0.0 is "Major version zero (0.y.z) is for initial development. Anything may change at any time. The public API should not be considered stable."
This is when you are messing around a lot with your code, maybe testing the effects various code changes have on your output.
Including version information in your [notes](doc/03-Howto-WriteDocumentation.md) (or, if you can, in the output somewhere) can help you track and compare those effects.

Even more importantly, you want people to be able to reproduce any published results using your software.
The fifth SemVer 2.0.0 specification is "Version 1.0.0 defines the public API. The way in which the version number is incremented after this release is dependent on this public API and how it changes."
When you publish your software and TODO tag your github commit as version 1.0.0, it should be usable to reproduce your published results.
If you later introduce improvements or changes that will produce different results when used in the experiments in your manuscript (not necessarily due to error: perhaps you reorganize or rename output files), you will want that information to be obvious to a user.

Versioning is also relevant to Singularity recipes.
If a recipe calls for cloning and compiling the latest version of a github repository's master branch, building the same recipe at two different times could result in two different Singularity images.

