# Running Jupyter Notebook remotely

[As discussed previously](04-Howto-LiterateProgramming.md), Jupyter Notebook provides a convenient environment for data analysis that can capture code, output, and scientific narrative all in a single dynamic document.
Typically, Jupyter is launched from one's local laptop or desktop computer, and accessed via a browser application powered by a local web server.
However, with a bit of configuration you can connect your local web browser to a Jupyter environment running on a remote machine.
This can be useful if you want to analyze a large amount of remotely stored data without transferring it to you local machine, or if you want to take advantage of a remote machine with lots of CPU and/or memory resources.

## SSH port forwarding

The main trick to connecting to a remote Jupyter Notebook environment is setting up [SSH port forwarding](https://help.ubuntu.com/community/SSH/OpenSSH/PortForwarding), allowing you  to access a remote port from your local machine.
When Jupyter Notebook is launched, by default it runs on port 8888.
So before you connect to the remote machine on which you are going to run Jupyter, make sure to forward port 8888 to some port on your local system (I'll use 8887 here).

```
ssh -L 8887:localhost:8888 remote.machine.indiana.edu
```

## Launch Jupyter Notebook

Once your SSH connection to the remote machine is established, go to your working directory and launch the notebook environment.

```
jupyter notebook
```

The notebook will not automatically open in your web browser as it does when you launch Jupyter locally, but it might bring up a text-based browser showing you the status of the Jupyter environment.

## Open Jupyter in your web browser

If the SSH port forwarding was configured correctly and Jupyter launched without any issues, you should be able to access the Jupyter Notebook by pointing your web browser to `http://localhost:8887`.
You'll then be able, from your web browser, to create new notebooks, modify and rerun existing notebooks, and access remotely stored data.
