# How to backup

## The why and what

Backups provide a vital tool in our defense against accidental or malicious loss of valuable computer files.
What is valuable is subject to individual assessment, but a general rule for the group would be that anything that represents intellectual effort would qualify, as opposed to something that can easily be re-generated based on the prior intellectual effort.
Thus, a script that encapsulates one of our typical workflows, starting with _wget_ commands to pull in publicly available data and ultimately resulting in final outputs (possibly including graphs and tables), is highly valuable.
The data the workflow generates are presumably worthwhile for the moment, but if they can be reproduced, then their loss would be temporary, not tragic.

## Not all backups are equally safe

Careful thought needs to be given as to suitable backup locations.
For example, you might develop a workflow script in your home directory under _work-in-progress_ and periodically put a copy into another directory called _my-backups_.
This is helpful in situations when you have accidentally deleted a section of your workflow during editing, for example.
Presumably, you can recover that section from your _my-backups_ directory.
But it is revealed as a poor choice when you have a disk failure that wipes out your home directory!
Ok, you might think, I'll put my backups on a different disk in the machine.
Better, but no safeguard against a complete machine failure.
Thus, we must stipulate our backup principle as: **"Backup all valuable files in multiple, independent locations."**

## What are suitable, independent backup locations for our group?

We have quite an array of possibilities for local and remote storage.
Let's review:

### Local storage ###
- bggnomic:/projects
- bggnomic:/home and bggnomic:/scratch
- bgserver (includes gremlin2 and gremlin4) disks
- bgresearch (includes gremlin1, gremlin3, gnomic, and grendel) disks
- /DATA/GROUP (attached to bgserver but constantly backed up by SICE)
- laptops
- external disks attached to laptops

### External storage ###
- IU Box
- IU One Drive
- IU HPC /N/dc2/projects/brendelgroup (time limited)
- github

Thus a sound backup strategy would be to (1) identify your valuable files as discussed above; (2) identify at least two independent storage locations for backup; and (3) backup now and frequently.

## Simple and effective backup commands ##

Probably the simplest command to use is _cp_.
This would be appropriate for copying between (independent locations) on one machine.
Example:

```
cp -ra /scratch/mywork /projects/backup/
```

will copy _mywork_ to _/projects/backup/mywork_ (preserving symbolic links).
To copy to another machine, use _scp_, but be warned that symbolic links will not be preserved:

```
scp -r /scratch/mywork backupmachine:/backupdirectory/
```

A better tool than _scp_ is _rsync_, which will preserve symbolic links and file properties if you use archive mode (-a), and maximizes speed by only transferring files that are newer or bigger at the source than the destination:
```
rsync -av /scratch/mywork backupmachine:/backupdirectory/
```

The complementary action (retrieving data from a remote machine) can be accomplished as follows:
```
rsync -av backupmachine:/backupdirectory/mywork /scratch/
```

A third alternative is the following (also preserving symbolic links and file properties):
```
cd /scratch
tar cpf - mywork | (ssh user@backupmachine "cd /backupdirectory; tar -xvf -")
```

The complementary action (retrieving data from a remote machine) can be accomplished as follows:
```
ssh user@backupmachine "cd /backupdirectory; tar cpf - mywork" | tar xvf -
```

which will put a copy of _mywork_ from the backupmachine into your current directory.

A clever way of communicating from our Linux machine with IU Box is via _lftp_.
You will have to set up an external password on IU Box; see instructions here: [Using Box under Linux](https://uisapp2.iu.edu/confluence-prd/display/SOICKB/Using+Box+under+Linux).
Add the following to your lftp config file (_~/.config/lftp/rc_):
```
set ftps:initial-prot ""
set ftp:ssl-force true ssl
set ftp:ssl-protect-data true
```

Run `lftp -e 'open ftps://ftp.box.com:990; user username@indiana.edu;'`  (replace _username_, of course) and enter the password you created.
Then run `bookmark add iubox` to be able to conveniently connect to IU Box (just run `lftp iubox`).
You can now run `lftp -c 'open iubox; mirror --reverse --no-perms --delete --verbose "/path/to/directoryname" directoryname'` to backup a directory and its contents to a directory of the same name in Box.
If you need to restore the contents, run `lftp -c 'open iubox; mirror  --no-perms --verbose "/path/to/restoreddirectory" directoryname'`
